ADR to document volume usage and running as root (#437)
alphagov/govuk-docker: docs/adr/0003-use-docker-volumes-for-improved-macos-performance.md

# 3. Use Docker volumes for improved macOS performance

Date: 2020-11-23

## Context

A common problem developers have experienced with GOV.UK Docker is that the
[asset pipeline][] compilation steps can be slow, to the point that it was once
common that users [were served 504 responses][504-fix] on initial attempts to
start an application. This slowness in GOV.UK Docker appeared to be an
amplification of [existing performance][govuk-frontend-performance] issues,
however when GOV.UK apps began upgrading

> from the end-of-life Ruby Sass to Sassc we began to see problems that pointed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from the end-of-life Ruby Sass to Sassc we also began to see problems that pointed
```

(They were two separate issue, after all.)

to a performance issue within GOV.UK Docker.

Sassc is known to [significantly improve the compilation time][sassc-speed] of
Sass compared to Ruby Sass. When we updated [Content Publisher][] to Sassc

> found that the [application.scss][] file compiled in 20% of the time (~20s to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we found that the [application.scss][] file compiled in 20% of the time (~20s to
```

4s) when running natively on macOS. However when this was run on GOV.UK Docker
the performance was significantly less impressive, compiling in 62% of the
time (~31s to ~19s).

We discovered that the source of this performance issue was the
[performance overhead of reading][docker-mac-read] from the

> [shared mount][govuk-mount] of application files on macOS. We considered a number

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[shared mount][govuk-mount] of application files on macOS, specifically the `tmp` and `node_modules` directories, which are both heavily in Sass compilation. We considered a number
```

These directories appear rather suddenly in the next section. We should indicate why they're relevant - the `node_modules` one is reasonably surprising, I think.

of options of how this could be improved:

1. Use [Docker volumes][volume] to store non-application code (such as caches or
   dependencies) to benefit from faster I/O access.

> 2. [Configure GOV.UK Docker to use NFS][nfs-docker] for improved I/O access to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. [Configure GOV.UK Docker to use NFS][nfs-docker] (an alternative driver for shared mounts) for improved I/O access to
```

Minor: we could give a bit more indication what this alternative means in practice.

   shared mounts.

> 3. Use [docker-sync.io](http://docker-sync.io/) as a means for improved I/O

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Use [docker-sync.io](http://docker-sync.io/) (a file-syncing daemon) as a means for improved I/O
```

Minor: we could give a bit more indication what this alternative means in practice.

   access to shared mounts.

[asset pipeline]: https://guides.rubyonrails.org/asset_pipeline.html
[504-fix]: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-docker/pull/310
[govuk-frontend-performance]: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-frontend/issues/1671
[sassc-speed]: https://www.solitr.com/blog/2014/01/css-preprocessor-benchmark/
[Content Publisher]: https://github.com/alphagov/content-publisher
[application.scss]: https://github.com/alphagov/content-publisher/blob/2f91d43bcd1eb1f2d30f9d1ff9e556cd4d0de2a6/app/assets/stylesheets/application.scss
[docker-mac-read]: https://github.com/docker/for-mac/issues/77
[govuk-mount]: https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-docker/blob/cb124a3a1d3353e777d4f777d77f03f93415d415/projects/content-publisher/docker-compose.yml#L11
[volume]: https://docs.docker.com/storage/volumes/
[nfs-docker]: https://www.jeffgeerling.com/blog/2020/revisiting-docker-macs-performance-nfs-volumes

## Decision

> We decided to use Docker volumes for non-application code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We decided to mount project-specific Docker volumes on top of the existing `~/govuk` shared mount, in order to store non-application code (caches or dependencies).
```

We can be more specific here, since we already use Docker volumes for non-application code (e.g. rbenv). Some of the decision points:

- It's conceptually more confusing to have volumes on top of volumes.

- It's more config overhead to specify volumes or a per-project basis.

When trying this on Content Publisher with the `tmp` directory and
`node_modules` directory as Docker volumes we saw a significant improvement
in Sass compilation time on macOS:

| Environment                                           | Ruby Sass | Sassc | Decrease |
|-------------------------------------------------------|-----------|-------|----------|
| Native macOS                                          | ~20s      | ~4s   | 80%      |
| GOV.UK Docker (with shared `~/govuk` mount)           | ~31s      | ~19s  | 38%      |
| GOV.UK Docker (with `tmp` and `node_modules` volumes) | ~16s      | ~4s   | 75%      |

We saw less impressive improvements by switching the shared mount to use NFS.
This performed approximately 3 times slower than the Docker volume approach.
This approach was also not desirable as it required configuration on the host

> machine to create the NFS directory which would complicate installation and

Reviewer: This is quite a detailed explanation relative to the intro in the previous section. I've suggested we add a little more to explain it there, to try and match the depth here.

usage of GOV.UK Docker.

> We decided not to use docker-sync.io as that required additional dependencies

Reviewer: After I read this I still wondered: but what if it was worth it? Perhaps we can make the argument more explicit: the shared volume approach is _almost_ as good a native, and requires only a small amount of standard config; conversely, the other two approaches require significantly more setup.

and a large amount of additional configuration.

## Status

Accepted

## Consequences

We have added Docker volumes to the configuration of all GOV.UK Rails projects
so that the `tmp` directory is a volume. This provides improved I/O access to

> this directory and offers performance benefits outside of Sass compilation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this directory and offers performance benefits outside of Sass compilation (e.g. [for ActiveStorage](https://github.com/alphagov/content-publisher/blob/2f91d43bcd1eb1f2d30f9d1ff9e556cd4d0de2a6/config/storage.yml#L3).
```

To ensure this is applied consistently we have [added a test][tmp-test].

> For projects that make use of npm modules we will add a `node_modules` volume

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For projects that make use of npm modules we have added a `node_modules` volume
```

Sudden change in tense here.

to the project. This will mean that these installs can no longer be shared

> between a host machine and GOV.UK Docker - which is beneficial for any native

Reviewer: We should acknowledge the (unlikely) potential for confusion, since some of the directories seen on the local machine will no longer reflect those in use by the container. In particular, anyone who previously got away with running `npm/yarn install` will now have to run `govuk-docker-run npm/yarn install`.

> modules that are compiled for the installing OS. This is also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
modules by removing the potential for compatibility issues when compiling modules that were coupled to the specific OS. This is also
```

Minor: it took a couple of readings to understand this (I'm not aware it's been a problem).

[enforced by a test][node-test].

In order to make increased usage of Docker volumes we had to change the base
Dockerfile from [running as a specific user][specific-user] to the Docker
default of running as root. This is because it is
[difficult and complex][volume-root] to define volumes as owned by a different
user. This changes meant that all users of GOV.UK Docker needed to rebuild

> their images to accommodate this change. It is also increased the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
their images to accommodate this change. It is also slightly increased the
```

(Arguably it's actually _less_ complex, since we've removed all the surprising `privileged` flags everywhere.)

> [complexity in running Google Chrome][chrome-root] as part of an applications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[complexity in running Google Chrome][chrome-root] as part of an application's
```

Author: Argh, when will I ever get my possessives correct.
